Now, let's look for some methods for a feature extraction
for convolutional neural networks that you will be applying in this lesson.
First, a quick reminder on what a convolution is.
A convolutional filter is a processing algorithm where you would take
an image like this one and you would apply a filter kernel,
which will take patches of the image and
computes a linear operation which would result in
some value and this value would be an input into the different image.
Depending on the shape of this filter and on
the values in this filter and the nature of the computation,
we are able to extract certain features from the images.
Like in this case, our filter is
an edge extractor filter and we're extracting edges from the images.
As you can see, edges stand out here.
Now, a quick reminder on the architecture of convolutional neural networks.
This is a diagram of one.
In a convolutional neural network,
you would be looking at several input channels.
These input channels would have convolutional filters applied to them,
which would extract features from those.
Then you would have max pooling layers which would reduce resolution of those images.
Then you would apply convolutions again and again you would apply the pooling filters,
thus decreasing the resolution of the images and increasing the context of the features,
so you would be getting rid of
the small details and looking at the big picture, so to say.
Then in the end,
in a classification network you have
some fully connected layer which maps to a limited set of classes which you are
trying to predict through the process of training
the neural networks through running a back propagation steps.
You figure out which are the weights and what are the kernels that should be used in
this convolution so that our network can extract relevant features from those images.
So what options do we have on our hands when we think about medical images?
There are several methods which are being used for building
convolutional networks in medical images.
So first, we need to remember that 3D images are stacks
of 2D pictures and many processing methods rely on that.
Unless you have seen, we have extracted two-dimensional slides and visualized them.
So a natural way of dealing with 3D medical images,
so just treat each slice individually.
This is a two-dimensional approach and you can basically then
treat a 3D classification problem or
object detection problem as a series of
two-dimensional classification or object detection problems.
You can also combine this method with looking into neighboring slices.
So you would still have a slice that you're focusing
on but when computing convolutions or other feature layers,
you would be drawing upon the slices that
are next to the one that you are currently focusing on.
You can treat an image as a volume and you can have full 3D convolutions which
would have a coronal that essentially
is represented by a three-dimensional cuboid structure.
Let's look at those a little bit in more detail.
With 2D convolution as we have discussed,
you basically can apply your neural network methods to
every slice and then this problem becomes very similar to what is being
used in regular domain images for tasks like classifying
photo libraries or detecting objects from cameras.
That gives you a lot of flexibility because there is a lot of
algorithms out there which have been implemented and tried and are true.
The algorithms are even parts of popular deep learning frameworks.
These algorithms have been studied.
We have beautiful visualizations like that or you
can think about the tradeoffs between different algorithms.
If your neural network does a good job in classifying medical volumes by
using one of those popular algorithms then it's great and
you won't have to tinker a lot with the parameters of the neural network.
If you want to look deeper and extract a more complex features,
if you want to leverage some of the three-dimensional nature of the images,
you have options of 2.5D and 3D convolutions.
So with 2.5D methods,
there are many approaches here.
You can look at slices which are next to each other in 3D space across the Z-axis,
or you can do something like this,
like the authors of this paper did where they took patches from the image
and they extracted coronal and sagittal slices in addition to the axial slice,
which is the primary method of a study.
They use them as a three channel input into their convolutional filter,
which is also a valid approach and you're encouraged to take
a look at this paper if you're interested.
They have some interesting results and we will touch upon this method in our exercise.
Then we have the full 3D convolutions.
So full 3D convolutions,
you basically take a cuboid volume,
as we have discussed, and you use that as your convolutional filter.
This method definitely uses the full three-dimensional nature of your image.
It is capable of extracting the features which would take into
account the complexity of a 3D configuration of different anatomical structures.
This method also uses more memory and uses up more compute time.
So it is up to you to decide which method is suitable for your machine learning problem.
One other thing to note here is as you are building machine learning algorithms and
networks and you are thinking of more types of convolutional filters to apply,
one popular optimization strategy,
which has been used in many medical imaging applications,
is the strategy of patching.
Like the authors of this paper were not applying
their filters and ingesting the entire images into their neural network but rather
they were extracting rectangular patches from
their images and feeding this patches as multiple channels into their network.
This is a perfectly valid way of doing things,
especially if you're looking for some smaller structures and you know
that your network might not really change it's
performance if you feed the entire images to that but you can save a lot of space and it
can parallelize better if you can do the patched data loading in the network.